# trismus-atlas
A trismus related OAR atlas, developed by Dr Christina Hague, code by me. Rehosted here because UoM version is offline

# How to use it
This link will take you to a live page where you can view the atlas and use it. Instructions are given when you load the page.

[Access atlas here](https://afg1.github.io/trismus-atlas)

# Browser compatibility
For reasons, this atlas does not work properly when viewed in firefox. For best results, we recommend using google chrome. Also, since we use webGL, things might get a bit funky if you have a very old graphics processor. Almost certainly not a problem on a reasonably modern computer.

# Disclaimer
This atlas is intended for use by professionals, for research purposes only. Users of this atlas do so at their own risk. The information contained within the atlas represents the consensus of the paper authors. 


# Citation
If you use this atlas, please cite the paper in which we developed it, the details of which are below.


Christina Hague, William Beasley, Lynne Dixon, Simona Gaito, Kate Garcez, Andrew Green, Lip W. Lee, Massimo Maranzano, Andrew McPartlin, Hitesh Mistry, Damian Mullan, Andrew J. Sykes, David Thomson, Marcel Van Herk, Catharine M. West, Nick Slevin,
*Use of a novel atlas for muscles of mastication to reduce inter observer variability in head and neck radiotherapy contouring*,
Radiotherapy and Oncology,
Volume 130,
2019,
Pages 56-61,
ISSN 0167-8140,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radonc.2018.10.030.
(https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167814018335540)



Abstract: 

**Purpose/objective(s)**

Trismus is caused by injury to the masticatory muscles resulting from cancer or its treatment. Contouring these muscles to reduce dose and radiation related trismus can be problematic due to interobserver variability. This study aimed to evaluate the reduction in interobserver variability achievable with a new contouring atlas.

**Materials/methods**

The atlas included: medial and lateral pterygoids (MP, LP), masseter (M) and temporalis (T) muscles, and the temporo-mandibular joint (TMJ). Seven clinicians delineated five paired structures on CT scans from 5 patients without the atlas. After ≥5 weeks, contouring was repeated using the atlas. Using contours generated by the clinicians on the same 5 CT scans as reference, dice similarity coefficient (DSC), mean distance-to-agreement (DTA) and centre of mass (COM) difference were compared with and without the atlas. Comparison was also performed split by training grade. Mean and standard deviation (SD) values were measured.

**Results**

The atlas reduced interobserver variability for all structures. Mean DTA significantly improved for MP (p = 0.01), M (p < 0.01), T (p < 0.01) and TMJ (p < 0.01). Mean DTA improved using the atlas for the trainees across all muscles, with the largest reduction in variability observed for the T (4.3 ± 7.1 v 1.2 ± 0.4 mm, p = 0.06) and TMJ (2.1 ± 0.7 v 0.8 ± 0.3 mm, p < 0.01). Distance between the COM and interobserver variability reduced in all directions for MP and T.

**Conclusion**

A new atlas for contouring masticatory muscles during radiotherapy planning for head and neck cancer reduces interobserver variability and could be used as an educational tool.


